---
layout: post
title: Thoughts on Joker
---

I saw [Joker](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt7286456/) yesterday. It was heavy, but good. In the way that a good movie should engage its viewer's emotions. I honestly can't remember the last movie that absorbed my thoughts and energy as much as <em>Joker</em> did. I felt like I needed to physically recover afterwards. Anyway, some thoughts (spoilers ahead!):
* The movie's thesis is that society created Joker. Arthur Fleck was a benign man, who had mental illness (by the way, I looked it up and his uncontrollable, inappropriate laughter is an actual medical condition: [Pseudobulbar affect](https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/pseudobulbar-affect/symptoms-causes/syc-20353737)), and just wanted to become a comedian. We never see any sign of ill intention or violent nature at first. And actually, his first three (and most significant) victims were a result of self-defense. 

* The city latches onto these murders as kind of a symbolic, populist-like resistance against the cruel, corporate, bourgeoisie of Gotham city. We meet an arrogant, unsympathetic Thomas Wayne (Batman's posthumous father) as not only as a powerful leader of this class, but also as perhaps Arthur's true father[^1]. But if Arthur's father is Thomas Wayne, Joker is literally born from the cruelty of the wealthy.

* Things fall apart in Arthur's life, outside of his control. He gets fired from multiple jobs, his mom has a stroke, and he is beaten, shunned, and mocked by everyone, including his idols. But on top of all this, the city cuts the budget across social welfare and healthcare programs, meaning Arthur loses access to his medications[^2]. This is a pivotal moment because perhaps medication was the one thing helping Arthur stay grounded in reality; it's possible that Arthur would have never become Joker otherwise.

* From the opening scene throughout the whole movie (maybe short of the last scene), we pity and sympathize with Arthur. It makes this movie such a compelling defense of one of [comics' most notorious and iconic villians](https://www.ign.com/lists/top-100-comic-book-villains/2). And in an ironic reversal, Joker emerges as actually the hero and leader of, the common man, Gotham's proletariat; meanwhile we are forced to blame "the system" (and in a way, ourselves) with its downfall.

* I thought the story-telling, the acting, and the political/populist undertones made this movie highly compelling. Was a bit confused why reviews were so mixed. [Rotten Tomatoes gave it a 68%](https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/joker_2019). Given that <em>Avengers: Endgame</em> got a 94%, I would have have expected something closer to 85% for <em>Joker</em>. Would be interesting to look at some data comparing the "Tomatometer" against "Audience Score", I see it was 89% for the former and 91% for the latter. Or try to figure out why critics disliked <em>Joker</em>. Maybe for a future post!

[^1]: This plot point was confusing to me, since we see him deny it in the bathroom scene and the offical records suggesting adoption, but didn't his mom say say something about how he made her sign some papers? 
[^2]: This felt sadly too realistic with our current broken healthcare system. This point, along with the plot points on gun violence and income equality, all reflect important real issues and are high priority for the upcoming election.